1. How to Handle SHIR Failures in the VM
A. ADF Built-in Error Handling
Retry Policies in Pipelines:
In the Copy Data activity or any activity in your pipeline, you can configure retry policies.
Go to the activity settings in ADF:
Retry: Set the number of retry attempts (e.g., 3 retries).
Retry Interval: Set a delay between retries (e.g., 5 minutes).
On Failure Activities:
Use conditional paths like ‘On Failure’ in your pipeline to handle failures gracefully.
Example: If the file pull fails, send an alert email or log the failure to a monitoring system.
B. High Availability Setup for SHIR
Install SHIR on Multiple VMs:
To ensure High Availability (HA), install SHIR on multiple VMs.
Register them under the same SHIR name in ADF.
ADF will automatically load-balance requests between the available SHIR nodes.
If one VM or SHIR instance fails, ADF will automatically switch to another available instance.
2. Monitoring SHIR and VM Health
A. Monitoring SHIR Status in Azure
Azure Integration Runtime Monitoring:

Go to Azure Data Factory > Manage > Integration Runtimes.
Here you can see the status of the SHIR (Online/Offline).
Click on the SHIR to view detailed diagnostics, such as connection status, errors, and logs.
Set Up Alerts for SHIR Status:

Go to Azure Monitor > Alerts > + New Alert Rule.
Resource: Select your Self-Hosted Integration Runtime.
Condition: Choose ‘Integration Runtime is Offline’ or similar metric.
Action Group: Configure email, SMS, or webhook notifications to alert the team if SHIR goes offline.
B. Monitoring VM Health
Enable Azure VM Monitoring:

In the Azure Portal, go to your VM where SHIR is installed.
Enable Azure Monitor and Log Analytics for the VM.
This will provide insights into:
CPU, memory, disk usage.
Network connectivity.
Service availability (e.g., SHIR service).
Create VM Health Alerts:

Go to Azure Monitor > Alerts > + New Alert Rule.
Resource: Select the VM.
Conditions to Monitor:
CPU Utilization (if too high/low, it may indicate an issue).
Disk Space (low disk space can cause SHIR failures).
Network Connectivity (loss of network connection can cause SHIR to fail).
Service Status (monitor if the SHIR service stops unexpectedly).
Monitor Windows Event Logs (Optional):

Use Log Analytics to monitor Windows Event Logs for errors related to SHIR:
Look for events like service crashes, authentication issues, etc.
Query Example in Log Analytics:
kusto
Copy
Edit
Event
| where EventLog == "Application"
| where Source == "DataManagementGateway" and EventLevelName == "Error"
3. Notifications and Alerts
A. Sending Alerts When SHIR Fails
Azure Monitor Alerts:

Set up action groups in Azure Monitor to send notifications via:
Email: Notify your team directly.
SMS: For critical failures.
Webhook: Integrate with tools like Slack, Microsoft Teams, PagerDuty, etc.
Use Logic Apps for Advanced Notifications:

Create an Azure Logic App to automate notifications when SHIR fails.
The Logic App can:
Send detailed emails with error logs.
Post messages to Teams or Slack.
Trigger other workflows (like restarting SHIR).
B. Automatically Restart SHIR on Failure
Set SHIR Service to Auto-Restart:

On the VM, open Services (services.msc).
Find the Microsoft Integration Runtime Service.
Right-click > Properties > Go to the Recovery tab.
Set First Failure, Second Failure, and Subsequent Failures to Restart the Service.
Use Azure Automation Runbooks (Optional):

Create a Runbook in Azure Automation to automatically restart the VM or SHIR service if it detects failures.
4. Logging and Diagnostics
Enable Diagnostics for SHIR:

In Azure Data Factory > Integration Runtime, enable Diagnostic Settings.
Send logs to Log Analytics, Storage Account, or Event Hub for further analysis.
Integrate with Splunk or Other Monitoring Tools:

If your organization uses Splunk, integrate ADF and SHIR logs with Splunk for centralized monitoring.
This can help in setting up dashboards and advanced alerting.
5. Example Scenario: Full Error Handling Flow
ADF Pipeline Fails to Pull File Due to SHIR Issue:

Retry the pipeline 3 times (automatic retries).
If it still fails:
Send an email notification using an ‘On Failure’ activity in ADF.
Log the error in Azure Log Analytics.
SHIR Goes Offline:

Azure Monitor detects the SHIR is offline.
Sends an SMS alert to the operations team.
Logic App automatically tries to restart the SHIR service on the VM.
If the issue persists, a Slack/Teams notification is sent for manual intervention.
VM Health Issue (e.g., High CPU/Network Failure):

Azure Monitor triggers an alert for abnormal VM behavior.
Action group sends notifications and, if configured, restarts the VM automatically.
Summary
ADF Error Handling: Use retry policies and conditional paths for error handling.
High Availability: Install SHIR on multiple VMs for automatic failover.
Monitoring SHIR and VM:
Use Azure Monitor to track SHIR status and VM health.
Set up alerts for SHIR going offline, VM performance issues, and service failures.
Notifications: Use Azure Monitor, Logic Apps, or third-party tools like Slack/Teams for alerts.
Automatic Recovery: Configure SHIR to auto-restart on failure and automate VM recovery with Azure Automation.
Let me know if you'd like help setting up specific alerts or automations!











